What do we picture when we think about the Holocaust? Who do we think of? Where do we
think of them? Do we think of Nazi storm troopers barking orders at groups of defenceless Jews
in German streets? Of men, women and children wearing yellow stars being beaten? Of broken
glass of Hitler and rallies at Nuremberg? Do we think of trains transporting victims,
families from their homes in central Europe to concentration camps and tree-lined thickets in
the East? Place names Bergen-Belsen, Treblinka, Dachau, Auschwitz-Birkenau. Barbed wire, wooden
huts and guard towers, places of death? Or do we think of heroic rescue? Of escape through enemy
lines? Of liberation, the resistance, the Warsaw uprising, the Kinder transport? Do we think of
Wales? Of Cardiff? Or Swansea? Or Abergella?
I knew where I was coming to in Wales because if you were under seven you had to have a home
to go to and I'd got pictures which I've still got of where I was going, the people, the husband
and wife and the grandfather and they had pictures of me. And then we got evacuated and we went to
Wales. While I was in Wales, in Cardiff, I went to the British Medical Association and said I was
here and I could do some work. So they sent me to Clwyn ap Ie hospital that was up in the Rhondda
Valley. We went to Llandudno, North Wales, a really good boarding house, but then we also had to
leave Llandudno, which became a protected area later on. Those three voices you just heard were
Renata Collins, Josephine Bruegel and Hans Albrecht. All of them fled their countries of birth,
Czechoslovakia and Austria, and became refugees in Wales. Each of them has a unique story,
sometimes uplifting, sometimes tragic, connecting the Holocaust to Wales. The Holocaust was one of
the defining moments of the 20th century and its effects were felt throughout the world,
including in Wales. Refugees from central Europe fled to Wales seeking sanctuary,
as did Holocaust survivors attempting to rebuild their lives in subsequent years. Welsh soldiers
and nurses were among the first to witness the horrors of the Nazi camps when they were liberated
at the end of the Second World War. In this podcast, we will explore how the Holocaust
impacted Wales. We will look at the stories of those who fled from Nazi tyranny to build
better lives for themselves and their families, and hear about the loved ones they had to leave
behind. We will learn how they have contributed to Welsh life, culturally, economically and
politically. The Holocaust did not just happen to other people in another place and time,
it is part of all of our history. This podcast has been created as part of Holocaust Resources
Wales, a project between the Centre for the Movement of People at Aberystwyth University
and the Jewish History Association of South Wales, and sponsored by the Association of Jewish
Refugees.